blog: NEAR for Web2 Backend Developers: A Familiar Frontier (#2595)
near/docs: docs/blog/near-for-backend-devs.md

As an experienced backend developer, you're adept at building robust services, managing databases, and ensuring system reliability. When you hear "blockchain," it might sound like a completely different paradigm. However, platforms like [NEAR Protocol](/protocol/basics) are designed to be surprisingly accessible, offering a new kind of backend infrastructure that leverages many concepts you're already familiar with.

This article will guide you through understanding NEAR from a backend perspective. We'll explore how it can be seen as a decentralized, highly available backend platform where:

*   **Your Application's Backend Logic** lives in "[smart contracts](/smart-contracts/what-is)," which you can write in familiar languages like [Rust](/tools/sdk) (and others that compile to [WebAssembly](/smart-contracts/anatomy/wasm)).
*   **Application State** is managed per application, similar to having a dedicated database for your service, but with global availability and data integrity secured by the network.
*   **User Identity and Permissions** are cryptographically secured and can be reliably checked within your application logic using an [AccountId](/protocol/account-model).

> *   **Data Replication** is handled by the network, providing something akin to a master-master replication setup with eventual consistency, typically reaching [finality](/protocol/transactions/overview#transaction-lifecycle--finality) (undisputed agreement) in about 1-2 seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Data Replication** is handled by the network, providing something akin to a master-master replication setup with eventual consistency, typically reaching [finality](/protocol/transaction-execution#receipts--finality) (undisputed agreement) in about 1-2 seconds.
```

//    - Traditional: SQL, NoSQL query languages
//    - NEAR: Manual iteration, no complex queries (design for simple access patterns)
```

This Rust smart contract ([here is the full version](https://github.com/frol/near-twitter-example-rs)) acts as the backend for our Twitter application. It defines the data structures, the initial state, and the functions that users can call to interact with the application. The use of `predecessor_account_id` is central to associating tweets with their authors.

## Interacting with Your NEAR Backend (Smart Contract)

Once your Rust smart contract is compiled to Wasm and deployed to a NEAR account (e.g., `twitter-app.your-account.near`), it's live and ready for interaction. So, how do you or your users "call" these backend functions?

Think of it like interacting with a standard web API, but instead of HTTP requests to a server you own, you're sending transactions or making RPC calls to the NEAR network, targeting your specific contract account and method.

**1. Calling Methods that Change State (e.g., `post_tweet`, `like_tweet`):**

These are "call" methods (marked `&mut self` in Rust) because they modify the contract's state.

> *   **Transactions:** To execute these, a user (or an application acting on their behalf) constructs a [transaction](/protocol/transactions/overview). This transaction specifies:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Transactions:** To execute these, a user (or an application acting on their behalf) constructs a [transaction](/protocol/transactions). This transaction specifies:
```

    *   NEAR's [account model](/protocol/account-model) provides a ready-made, secure user identity system. You don't need to build and maintain your own user database, password hashing, or session management for core identity.
    *   The use of `predecessor_account_id` based on cryptographic signatures provides strong guarantees about who initiated an action, simplifying authorization logic within your contract.

4.  **High Availability and Resilience:**
    *   Being a decentralized network, NEAR is inherently resilient to single points of failure. Your application's backend logic and state remain accessible as long as the NEAR network itself is operational, which is designed for high uptime. This is like getting a globally distributed, fault-tolerant deployment out of the box.

5.  **Censorship Resistance:**
    *   Once deployed, your smart contract logic cannot be easily shut down or tampered with by a single entity, including the original developer (unless specific upgrade mechanisms are built in and governed by clear rules). This provides a degree of censorship resistance for applications and their data.

6.  **Fast Finality and Scalable by Design:**

>     *   NEAR's ~1-2 second [finality](/protocol/transactions/overview#transaction-lifecycle--finality) means transactions are quickly confirmed and irreversible, providing a responsive user experience for a decentralized system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    *   NEAR's ~1-2 second [finality](/protocol/transaction-execution) means transactions are quickly confirmed and irreversible, providing a responsive user experience for a decentralized system.
```
